Frequently asked questions



Who?

Hello, I’m Oleksandr Kaleniuk – a Ukrainian software engineer. 

I have bachelors and masters in computer science, and C. T. S (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candidate_of_Sciences) in applied geometry. The last one took me five years writing the thesis, publishing papers, and speaking at local conferences. It was a slow burner and eventually it burned my passion for academia to the ground.

I did all sorts of odd jobs in the early 2000s. I’ve been a porter, a journalist, a bassist, a web-designer, a game designer, and a technical editor for a book on historical methrology. I’ve been programming the whole time too, but this was before the outsourcing boom and all the real money was somewhere else.

After the graduation I got a full time job in a small game development studio, got a part time job at the University, and started a side-project with my brother to do something in my spare time. Which I didn’t really have because of the thesis, and the students, and the rehersals. I got used to this schedule though. One day, the thesis was at the proofreader, and the students were on holidays, and the side-project was long gone, and it was Sunday, and suddenly, first time in years, I had nothing to do. The witnesses say I got real drunk real fast and ended up singing Tom Waits’ songs he never wrote.

In 2012 I quit my job in game dev, quit the university, and came back to my home town in Eastern Ukraine. I’ve been planning to decompress for a while but somehow I landed on a job doing back-end in Erlang remotely for a Turkish gaming site. It was fun and new, and I learned a lot. Unfortunatelly, the remote work arrangement didn’t work for me. I started bringing work problems home and personal problems to work. A few days before Cristmass I quit that job too.

I spent most of the winter frying potatoes, playing Borderlands, and watching videos from C++  conferences. Then I got hired by a nuclear power plant automation firm to do research in ■■■■■ ■■■■■■■■ and ■■■■■ ■■■■■■■■■■. This was an eye opening experiense. I learned that I have to relearn all the things I learned previously to call myself an engineer. Phylosophy and marketing spoiled the software anywhere else, but it safety critical engineering you have to let the beliefs go and let evidence take their place.

In 2014 the war broke out. I was still in Eastern Ukraine. My town was occupied by Russians, then luckily fought back soon before the Minsk Protocol. I was there the whole time. In 2014, I used to say that the whole invasion is a mere act of terrorism and if you’re getting terrified of terror, you just make their work easier. But in truth, I was just mentally paralised. The day we were being liberated, with all that gun fire and empty streets, I packed my lunch and went to work. Had to wait for a bus for quite some time until I started to realise that something is wrong. 

Something did get wrong. Maybe forever, maybe for a few generations. Apart from the very few, all the people I had respect for left the town. I spent autumn helping people pack and move. The next spring my contract with the NPP firm ended and I decided to move on, too.

And that’s how I landed working for Materialise in Kyiv. SDK Core team in the Central Research and Development department to be exact. My work is to make the said SDK better. It's the job between math and low-level programming so it suits me well. 


What?

This is Words and Buttons Online – a growing collection of blah-blah-blah about blah-blah-blah. Ok, I admit it. It's my blog.

I didn't want it to be a blog though. That's why pages don't have timestamps and any authorship attribution.

But it wasn't truly anonymous either. It wasn't the goal. The goal always was to give the readeds all the value with as little overhead as possible. I'd say, for 99% of readers the authorship of content is uninterestiong and the time of publishing is irrelevant. The remaining 1% can easily get this info via GitHub. At the same time, the content of this site is vastly dictated by my own interests, my own experience, and my own mistakes, too. It would be dishonest to evade the responsibility for them by going 100% anonymous.

So this is a blog with interactive elements and without timestamps and attribution. 

Each page is self-sustained, you can download it, mail it, store it on a zip drive - it will still work perfectly fine with or without the other pages. The only exception is the page icon.


Why?

This things has so many points of agenda I forgot what were supposed to be hidden. 

Plus, the whole thing is eclectic. It might be that the reasoning for one page isn't the same as for another.

One thing is absolutely clear though: this is not about traditional business model. I do not collect user data, I do not show ads, and I don't do product placement. Weird enough, technically this site is profitable.

In general, it works like this. I learn something cool, I share it, I get feedback and I get better at what I do. This affects my rate as a contractor and gives material for the talks. And since my expenses are very low, the remuneration for the latter alone covers them with a think overlap.

Sometimes, I share something that have no potential for the talks. That's mostly basic math pages. I still get a bit of experience from doing them but I don't get a lot of useful feedback. I believe it's still important to do them once in a while because basic math awareness benefits everyone. Besides, I use the code from the pages to show things to analysists at work. With more basic pages I have more basic code.



How?


